# GR-SSLCM Meeting 7/31/2020

**NOTE**: This call was between Staton and Gibson only, purpose was to discuss recent developments related to ODFW permissions to host data for LCM in a GitHub repository.

**NOTE**: There was no "agenda" pre-call, so these are all notes developed following the completion of the call.

### Two Main Issues

#### Is ODFW okay with data being hosted on GitHub?

* ODFW has a desire to make sure that any publicly available data are the official version of record

* During model development, we may be committing developmental versions of various data files, that conflict with the version of record. When the repo is made public, people could go into the history and access non-official versions.

* **Proposed solution:** have a separate repository that houses all data and that remains private during all model development (and potentially, following publication of model repository).

  * Preferred repository title: `GR-SSLCM-data`

  * Gibson would be the repo owner

  * Commits to this data repository would not be part of the model development history - so future users could not access unofficial versions

  * Upon publication, we would seek ODFW approval to make the final versions of the data public - this would ensure the model is fully reproducible by any reader of the repo or publication

    * If they approve, all is good
    * If they deny, we may still be able to share it if contacted by interested readers - sufficient caveats (e.g., requests not to share, statements about unofficial data, etc.) may be necessary

  * This approach is non-ideal (ideally, code and data would be versioned together), but it is definitely workable.

    * Everyone would need to have their local repos stored in the same relative location to each other. E.g., here is Staton's proposition:

      ```
      C:/Users/bstaton/Desktop/Staton/1_critfc/analyses/GR-SSLCM # model code
      C:/Users/bstaton/Desktop/Staton/1_critfc/analyses/GR-SSLCM-data # model data
      ```

    * Then, for all code found in `GR-SSLCM`, any time we refer to files found in `GR-SSLCM-data`, we would write the path as `../GR_SSLCM-data`

    * There is a possibility that model and data become inconsistent. **IMPORTANT**: always ensure directory structure of `GR-SSLCM-data` doesn't change, as well as file names, and column names. This will ensure the code is still executable regardless of the data version. It is fine to add columns to data files.

#### Is ODFW okay with Gibson working on GitHub?

* There has been some discomfort raised - Gibson is currently seeking official approval
* Worst case scenario, Gibson maintains all data as local copy, and sends out updated zip folders when changes are made. Gibson would also likely loose commit/push privileges on `GR-SSLCM`, which would truly be unfortunate.