# GR-sslcm Meeting 2023-06-27

**Attendees:** Gibson, Liermann, Staton

*Post-meeting notes in italic*

## Purpose

Discuss the diagnostic tools used, the remaining concerns, key findings to date, and delegation of writing tasks.

## Materials Sent in Advance

Sent to Gibson, Justice, and Lierman by Staton on 2023-06-16

- `output-plots-base_vlong.html`
- `sim-vs-obs-base_vlong_sim.html`
- `GR-sslcm-concerns.xlsx`
- `GR-sslcm-math-description.pdf`
- `GR-sslcm Materials Overview.pptx` *sent as a follow-up, 2023-06-20*

## Overview of Model Adequacy Diagnostics

### MCMC

Staton will describe interpretations of:

- Rhat
- ESS
- MCCV

*No other MCMC diagnostics were recommended by the group.*

### Stochasticity: Quantile Residuals

Staton will describe the need for, logic behind, and interpretation of the quantile standardized residual approach.

*No additional feedback was given on this topic, though the group seemed supportive of this approach to model diagnosis.*

### Simulated vs. Observed Outcomes

Staton will describe the need for, logic behind, and interpretation of the output generated by the simulated vs. observed outcomes analysis.

*Liermann suggested using geometric mean rather than arithmetic mean for the mean ratios -- Staton confirmed this is already in use. Liermann recommended similarly that the CV comparison could be done on the multiplicative scale as well, perhaps just SD of log scale values.*

## Summary of Remaining Model Concerns

### Process Model

- Plausibility of pre-spawn survival -- lack of temporal variability is unrealistic; potentially problematic for UGR given apparent time trend. But needed to be time constant, see [#192](https://github.com/bstaton1/GR-sslcm/issues/192).
    *Much attention was directed at this topic. The group agreed that time-constant pre-spawn survival was unrealistic, but that the confounding behavior was concerning and should be avoided if possible. It was ultimately decided to try obtaining estimates of time-varying survival external to the model and to supply them to the model as known without error. This approach avoids the confounding while at least acknowledging that pre-spawn survival varies among years. See [#203](https://github.com/bstaton1/GR-sslcm/issues/203)*
- Pr(Mature at Age-4) process noise is time trending upward
    *There is some interest in accounting for time-trending maturity, however it was not deemed to be of sufficient importance to delay considering the model sufficient for publication. A logit-linear model with year as the covariate could work, or a random walk with non-zero drift parameter could work, but these would not be terribly useful in simulation.*
- Simulated abundances too high in general, worst for UGR
    *Some mild concern was voiced by the group on this topic, but in general they were reassured that the range of outcomes produced by the model are similar between observed and simulated periods.*

### Observation Model

- Fit to pre-spawn survival data -- lack of temporal variability makes data over-dispersed
    *See resolution to first bullet in the process model section above.*
- Fit to MIN abundance data is a bit biased low
    *Minor enough issue to not warrant mention.*
- Noise diagnostics look poor for composition data, but visual fit reveals no glaring patterns.
    *Minor enough issue to not warrant mention.*
- Are the observation error CVs on mean lengths way too small (&lt;<1%)? Model seems to fail (collapses to zero process noise) if obs. cv is &gt;2.5%.
    *The group agrees that the very small CVs are unrealistic for the mean length estimates. However, Gibson raised the point that the reasons causing the additional uncertainty in mean length estimates (e.g., narrow spatial coverage of tagging) also pertain to the other juvenile data sources (e.g., survival estimates). So can we justify artificially inflating the CV on mean length but not other data sources? Gibson was okay with doing this, but thought this important to consider. Staton agrees that this is a good point. However, in this case I think the CVs are so absurdly low that they cannot plausibly be true, whereas this is probably not true for the other data sources. See [#205](https://github.com/bstaton1/GR-sslcm/issues/205)*

## Summary of Key Findings to Date

- Density-dependent juvenile survival, mediated by size
- Moderate-to-high degree of autocorrelation in egg-to-parr survival anomalies
- Autocorrelation in Yr1 ocean survival lower than expected
- Synchrony among populations to a positive, non-zero degree for many processes; strongest correlationse are for Yr1 ocean survival and maturity.
- Heterogeneity in productivity, capacity, and baseline survival rates
- Quantified effect of WUL on capacity
- Fall migrant life history is rarer, but has higher survival. Can calculate effect of losing the fall migrant strategy
- Mostly homogeneous length effects on survival

*The group thought this is a useful list of results topics so far, but thinks they are somewhat disparate. The group thinks a more cohesive story will be needed for manuscript submission (Staton agrees).*

## Delegation of Writing Tasks

- Staton
    - Draft intro, methods, results, figures
- Gibson/Feldhaus
    - Compile citations for all data sources provided by ODFW
    - Write main-text (abbreviated) and supplemental (long form) descriptions of data sets
    - Obtain clarity on data sharing policies
    - Make/obtain map figure
- Liermann/Sharma
    - Work with Staton on framing intro
    - Review math description, send Staton feedback
- Justice/Kaylor/White
    - Write WUL derivation description, either separate paper or supplement
- All
    - Brainstorm discussion topics
    - Review drafts

*No issues were raised with the task delegation. Staton originally had the map assigned to Justice/Kaylor/White, but Gibson stated she had a map largely ready to go.*

**Target first submission**: August 31, 2023

*With field work and meetings, the group thinks this submission deadline is ambitious, and that perhaps September 30, 2023 may be more realistic.*
