# GR-sslcm Meeting 2023-02-09

**Attendees**: Gibson, Justice, Liermann, Staton, White

*The notes for this meeting are summarized in a set of email threads.*
*Some slight edits have been made by B. Staton for clarity and formatting; irrelevant email content has been excluded.*

## Purpose

This meeting was called by M. Liermann to get an update on GR life cycle modeling: status, plans, and potential for new work.

## Email-Based Summaries

As a follow-up to the call, M. Liermann wrote this summary and included all participants plus G. Pess:

> This is my understanding of where the GR restoration prioritization work is.
> 
> - Fish model (relating population parametrs to fish dynamics): (SSM) is pretty much ready. Ben will work to finish up a few details and write up the work during the spring.
> - Habitat model (relating stream habitat characteristics to fish parameters): Casey has developed a model relating fish density (?) to 5 stream habitat characteristics (measured at the unit or reach scale?). There may be further developments, but the basic structure is there.
> - Habitat potential model (what are we shooting for): Seth et al. developed a model of stream habitat potential using many basins (some outside of the GR, ~14?). Reaches were classified by the Beechie channel type (or Montgomery for smaller streams). They looked at the distribution of habitat characteristics within each type and chose the 90% percentile as the "target" conditions.
> 
> How will this all come together (simplified version). Hopefully with initial products this year:
> 
> 1.  Restoration scenarios will be developed using the "Habitat Potential" model which assumes that a certain proportion of the basin is modified to reflect the "target" conditions.
> 2.  These restored condition habitat metrics will be fed into Casey's model along with the current conditions. The change in predicted density (between current and restored) will then be used to update the fish model parameters.
> 3.  The fish model will be used to simulate forward in time to assess the effects of these changes on abundance, viability, etc...
> 
> Other factors that will be considered are:
> 
> 1.  What would happen if the lower river survival problem were fixed?
> 2.  Presumably temperature effects using Casey and Seth's work.
> 3.  Other restoration actions that don't fit into this framework?
> 
> We also talked about the possibility of exploring other hypothetical scenarios like:
> 
> - Changing densities of spawners (less aggregation in space and time). This would be done in the DD model parameters.
> - Assuming a different SR functional form with continued increase in smolt output outside the range of the current spawners.
> - Building in growth effects using the carcass study results and perhaps building on some of Kaylor et al.'s work.
> - Considering restored conditions that are outside of what we typically see. For example, stage 0-like conditions, with lots of horizontal habitat, cooling and slowing water through the system, etc.
> - Changes to pre-spawn mort (we didn't talk about this but I assume it will be included).
> 
> I talked a lot about wanting to avoid painting ourselves into a corner by making modest assumptions about the potential for increases in freshwater production.
> 
> - We need to think about what would happen if many more spawners returned (we don't have fish data to predict this!), or what would happen if fish distribution changed, or if mortality was occurring earlier than we thought, ...
> - Our assumptions will determine the predicted effects of reducing harvest or other survival (density independent) effects. For example, reducing pre-spawn mortality might have a much larger effect if you assume there is less of a bottle neck in summer rearing (i.e., more potential for increased smolt numbers when you move outside of the contemporary spawner data range).

In response, S. White replied:

> The way I would characterize the CRITFC restoration scenarios as we envisioned them include the following. These are detailed in the attached spreadsheet \[*sent 2023-02-09 16:49*\] but essentially:
> 
> 1.  "Baseline" restoration, which means meeting all instream and floodplain restoration targets within Atlas Tier I areas (where targets are teh 90th percentile values from all the CHaMP watersheds according to geomorphic reach type as you correctly noted)
> 2.  Baseline + riparian, which includes riparian shading to cool water temperatures
> 3.  Baseline + riparian + foodweb, which includes the carcass addition effects on fish growth derived from Matt's work
> 4.  Max restoration, which includes all of the above AND instream + floodplain restoration in all Chinook spawning and rearing areas (Atlas Tiers I-III)
> 
> Then, several iterations of these will be crossed with the above, accounting for:
> 
> 1.  Allowing full landowner access (e.g., Vey Meadows and other places)
> 2.  Increasing the lower valley survival (even though we don't know the mechanism yet)
> 3.  Ceasing hatchery supplementation (or ramping it up)
> 
> Overall, the combinations make ~28 scenarios that focus on these in-basin factors. We've talked about running all 28 scenarios then choose the ones yielding high, med, low fish response and add additional changes but very simplified (think "sensitivity analysis") including the following out-of-basin factors:
> 
> - Climate change (e.g., effect on ocean conditions)
> - Hydropower (e.g., breaching one or several dams, assuming equal mortality at each)
> - Sea lion predation (e.g., status quo vs. hazing/culling)
> - Harvest management (e.g., halve or double harvest)
> - Others (see spreadsheet)

In response, primarily to M. Liermann, B. Staton replied:

> One thing I want to clarify is the progress on the SSM -- I’m not sure I’d say it is quite to the “pretty much ready” stage. You \[*M. Liermann*\] and I met recently and discussed the major loose ends -- you had some great suggestions of things to try and I’ve made some progress on exploring some of them. I plan to reach out more regularly to keep you in the loop on progress/problems/ideas. I do think it’s reasonable to have these issues buttoned up throughout the spring, and I can be writing it up simultaneously with the target of a mid-summer submission.
> 
> \[Staton attached document `GR-sslcm-AMIP-Jun-2022-Staton-v4.pdf`\]